---
title: 'MatD<sup>3</sup>: A Database and Online Presentation Package for Research Data Supporting Materials Discovery, Design, and Dissemination'
tags:
  - Python
  - Django
  - materials
  - perovskite
  - database
authors:
  - name: Raul Laasner
    orcid: 0000-0002-9714-1189
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Xiaochen Du
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Aditya Tanikanti
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Connor Clayton
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Marco Govoni
    affiliation: "2, 4"
  - name: Giulia Galli
    affiliation: "2, 4, 5"
  - name: Matti Ropo
    affiliation: 6
  - name: Volker Blum
    affiliation: "1, 7"
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Duke University
   index: 1
 - name: Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago
   index: 2
 - name: Carnegie Mellon University
   index: 3
 - name: Materials Science Division and Center for Molecular Engineering, Argonne National Laboratory
   index: 4
 - name: Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago
   index: 5
 - name: Department of Physics, University of Turku
   index: 6
 - name: Department of Chemistry, Duke University
   index: 7
date: 25 October 2019
bibliography: refs.bib
---

The discovery of new materials as well as the determination of a vast set of materials properties for science and technology is an exploding field, spread out across a vast community of small, mid-sized and large research groups worldwide. Materials data from individual research groups is traditionally disseminated by way of loosely interconnected, peer-reviewed publications. Alternatively, individual large data-centric efforts such as the Materials Project [@jain13], Nomad [@nomad], Aflow [@curtarolo12], The Open Quantum Materials Database [@saal13], or the Materials Data Facility [@blaiszik16] are making large segments of materials data publicly available, but these efforts are typically not designed to cover the complete and diverse body of research results available from the many active groups in the literature (experimental or computational, data referring to the atomic scale, mesoscale, phase-pure or composite materials, etc.). Traditional data curation efforts such as SpringerMaterials [@springermaterials] or topical reviews have long supported the task of summarizing diverse sets of materials data from the community, but can only be inclusive of subcategories of materials, leading to a lag between new discoveries and the availability of data in curated, reusable collections. It would be appealing to enable small research groups directly to provide validated, curated web facing materials data (in addition or supplemental to peer-reviewed publications) but programming and maintaining the code behind such small research group data bases is a significant effort of its own.

MatD3 is an open-source, dedicated database and web application framework designed for the task of storing, curating and disseminating experimental and theoretical materials data generated by individual research groups or research consortia. A research group can set up their own instance of a MatD3 server to publish scientific results or might use an existing live instance maintained by a related team. Supplying research data in this form will be attractive to at least the subset of research groups in the community who are interested in better access, reproducibility, and broader dissemination of their research data for follow-up use by themselves and others. MatD3 is a general purpose database that does not focus on any specific level of theory or experimental method. Instead, the focus is on storing accurate data with features making it easy to curate the data that is on the database.

All data is stored in a structured (SQL) format which, along with a REST API (application programming interface for representational state transfer), allows easy access and manipulation of the entire database for anyone interested. This will potentially allow to extract new knowledge from a large amount of data made available by members of the scientific community. Even though the database is highly structured, the data submission interface is designed to be as simple to use as possible, with numerous help tips to guide the user through each step. Setting up the servers includes fairly standard steps and in the documentation we provide some example server configurations to get the user (or server administrator) started.

A counterpart to MatD3 is the Qresp web application [@govoni19], which is a tool to facilitate scientific data reproducibility by making available, in a distributed manner, all data and procedures presented in scientific papers, together with metadata to render them searchable and discoverable. The two main components of Qresp are *i)* the curator, guiding users in the creation of metadata for the data that accompanies a publishable scientific work, and *ii)* the explorer, a GUI for accessing datasets, exploring workflows, and downloading curated data, published in scientific papers.

We have implemented extensions to the Qresp and MatD3 interfaces, allowing collaborators to enter both their data as well as the associated publication and reproducibility information in a single workflow — i.e., to reduce as much as possible the barrier to entering the full and traceable data for a given material. Specifically, using the new web GUI makes it easy to *i)* create a new MatD3 database entry and simultaneously generate the corresponding metadata for the Qresp database, *ii)* generate the Qresp metadata for an already existing MatD3 entry, and *iii)* generate MatD3 database entries from the metadata present on the Qresp server. At the time of writing, there is one production instance of a MatD3 server (<https://materials.hybrid3.duke.edu/>) connected to a Qresp server (<https://qresp.hybrid3.duke.edu/>). However, the connection is not limited to specific servers. In fact, Qresp can serve as a frontend to any database that has the same API as MatD3 for submitting new data. Setting up MatD3 and Qresp instances to communicate with each other requires one to specify only a few environment variables, as detailed in the MatD3 documentation.

In summary, the MatD3 software provides a convenient, flexible, and complete solution for a web facing materials database for individual research groups. The availability of this solution will enable the community to take a significant step forward in making available the vast trove of newly generated materials research data directly for validation and reuse by others, in a convenient form that is directly amendable to processing by computational analysis or visualization software as well as quantitative data comparison and reproduction.

# Acknowledgements

This work was financially supported by the NSF under Award No. DMR-1729297. This work was supported by MICCoM, as part of the Computational Materials Sciences Program funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division.

# References
